## Summary of Nagel's What is it like to be a Bat? (Mortal Questions) - 22/11/2025

The key problem of the relationship between mind and body is that of consciousness, or subjective experience. An entity being conscious means there is something it is like to be that entity - it has subjective experience. 

Existing scientific and philosophical methods using a reductive approach will not explain consciousness. This is not because we need a new reductive approach - instead we must recognize that consciousness is fundamentally different from other objective phenomena in the universe. In reductive approaches to studying a phenomenon, we move beyond our subjective sense of the phenomenon towards an objective viewpoint. We leave behind subjective impressions and focus more on the common experience we can agree on of that phenomenon. With consciousness this will not work. We cannot leave behind the subjective, when the thing we need to explain is subjective experience itself.

If we assume a bat is conscious, then we can also assume that at least some of its experiences may be qualitatively different from our own. Bats use sonar to navigate at night, we lack this faculty. We cannot simply imagine ourselves flying around at night emitting sounds and listening carefully - the question is what is it like for a bat to be a bat (not for a human to imagine they are a bat). If we accept such alien experiences exist, we must also accept that we may never have the conceptual tools to describe those experiences.  These facts of experience cannot be known outside the point of view from which they originate.

Some argue that reductive approaches give us essential facts. For example, a reductive approach to sound identifies it as a wave phenomenon in air or other media. We learn a lot about sound with this approach but we lose the auditory experience. If physicalist approaches cannot explain this then it is not sufficient as an explanatory framework.
Others (neo-behaviourists) seek to replace the subjective with an objective picture of mind. Alternatively they state simply “mental events are physical events”. Despite this looking like an explanation - “x is y”, it is not. Normally, when we are told x is y, we can sense a path from x to y, a sense of similarity of simplification in saying x is y. But the mental is physical does not clarify anything or explain how subjective experience arises from physical processes. 

None of this proves physicalism false, but shows physicalism fails to explain consciousness and it is unclear how it could. Perhaps we could give physicalism a chance by developing an objective language of subjectivity. This might let us develop a way of speaking about subjective experience that could transmit or make clear the experiences of others. This would enhance our understanding of subjective experience (and possibly give us a sense of what it is like to be a bat), but would not obviously solve the question of why conscious experience accompanies physical events.

